The intersection of inequality in income and human development

The human development paradigm places people at the centre of development. From this perspective, “the objective of development is to create an enabling environment for people to enjoy long, healthy and creative lives” (UNDP, 1990). It involves expanding political freedoms and guaranteeing basic human rights. All people should be equipped with the knowledge and agency to make choices from a range of accessible alternatives so as to enhance their well-being at every stage of existence. In simple terms, human development is about enlarging people’s choices by improving their capabilities, expanding their opportunities and removing the social, cultural or political barriers that may work against them. 

Equity and universal opportunities for people, in this generation and in subsequent generations, to realize their full potential are central to the human development paradigm. Early Human Development Reports emphasised universalism and the need to aim for a world where “no child goes without an education, where no human being is denied healthcare and where all people can develop their potential capabilities” (UNDP, 1994). The reports also emphasise that all people should have the economic, social and political rights that allow them to make choices in line with their values and aspirations. The full realization of human potential for all people requires policy attention to inequalities in income and non-income resources, including basic services such as health and education, political participation and access to property and financial resources. 

Over the past 25 years, much progress has been made in many dimensions of human development: people are living longer, healthier and more creative lives; people are more knowledgeable and have access to resources needed to support a decent standard of living; more children are going to school; incomes are higher; and more people live under democratic regimes with greater potential for political engagement. In SSA, the number of children enrolled in primary education increased by 19 percent from 1990 to 2015 and child mortality dropped from 178.5 deaths per thousand live births to 91.2 over the same time period (UNDP, 2015a). Impressive progress in reducing poverty has been made in The Gambia (32 percent reduction since 1990), Burkina Faso, Niger, Swaziland, Ethiopia, Uganda and Malawi (UNECA, 2015). And yet, in many cases, progress in the region is marked by high levels of inequality in health, education and income, and in the urgency required to influence change. Gains have not been universal and many people still suffer deprivations in basic elements of life. 

There are significant differences in the human development of women and men as measured by the HDI. is is the case even though women in the region have a longer life expectancy than men. Much of the variation is due to women’s incomes falling far short of men’s and the levels of education of adult women falling below adult men’s. In 2014, average per capita gross national income (PPP) for women in the region was US$2,626 compared to US$4,148 for men (UNDP, 2015a). is is despite a relatively high labour force participation rate among women in SSA (65.4 percent) relative to other regions. Part of the variation in the incomes of men and women is related to the nature of the work that women do. They typically carry a disproportionate burden of the unpaid care work that is performed in the home. And even when they have paid work, they are more likely than men to be in vulnerable and informal jobs. 

Those living in poverty at the bottom of income distributions, many of whom are women and girls, and are often deprived in many other dimensions of human development, with implications for socio-economic mobility. Across all regions, children in the lowest wealth quintile are more likely to die before their fifth birthday than children in the wealthiest quintile. In SSA, child mortality rates are about 67 percent higher for the lowest quintile. These children are also almost twice as likely to suffer stunting from chronic malnutrition (UNDP, 2013a). Similar gaps can be observed in education outcomes. Children whose families are in the highest wealth quintile in the region are 60 percent more likely to complete primary school than children from the poorest quintile. Girls are even less likely than boys to complete primary school (ibid.). 

Health and education deprivation is higher in rural areas than in urban areas. In SSA, 77 percent of women in urban areas have access to maternal health care compared to only 38 percent of women living in rural areas. Globally, nearly half of people living in rural areas lack access to improved sanitation facilities, whereas only 18 percent of people in urban areas are without improved sanitation. Children from rural areas are also less likely to be in school; worldwide, twice as many rural children are out of school than in urban areas (UN, 2015). At the same time, levels of inequality in income and in access to services, infrastructure and opportunities are higher in urban areas. Slum populations, which make up 63 percent of the urban population in the region, are deprived of many basic services and opportunities (UN Habitat, 2013). 

There are also inequalities in access to information and technology, which are key tools for empowering people to expand their capabilities. In Africa, only one in every five people has access to the Internet (ITU, 2015). Women disproportionately lack access in developing countries, where 16 percent fewer women than men use the Internet (ITU, 2013). is digital divide can perpetuate inequalities in access to jobs and education and, in some cases, even limit opportunities for political participation. 

Overcoming income inequalities and empowering women to participate in the labour market and secure quality work is one way of ensuring that all people have opportunities to achieve their full potential in life. However, from a human development perspective, there are many other inequalities that deserve policy attention. For instance, more equitable access to health and education services and information, and equal rights to participate in political decisions can significantly enlarge people’s choices, particularly the most disadvantaged – women, the poor and those in rural areas. 

Income inequality and sustainable human development 

Income inequality can reinforce inequalities in health and education as well as work, political participation and security. These overlapping inequalities perpetuate exclusion and deprivations throughout the life course and across generations. As indicated in the section above, the poorest quintiles of the population are often the most deprived in access to healthcare and education. 

Access to quality health services is often limited for those living in poverty. Disparities in access to healthcare across income groups can result in disparities in health outcomes across these groups. For example, in Zambia, the poor are less likely to access public hospitals due to financial and physical barriers, despite showing higher need than other income groups. They are also more likely to use primary facilities such as health clinics, which have fewer resources (Phiri and Ataguba, 2014). In South Africa, HIV prevalence is found to be higher among those in the poorest socioeconomic groups. is may be due in part to access to information and access to HIV/AIDS testing. In one study, only 20.5 percent of the poor reported having access to information on HIV/AIDS compared to 79.5 percent of people from higher socioeconomic groups (Wabiri and Ta a, 2013). People who live in poor communities also have a higher risk of dying from non-communicable diseases such as lung cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular illnesses. is is due to a combination of inequalities in risk and in access to healthcare for timely diagnosis and treatment, both of which are linked to socioeconomic levels (Di Cesare et al., 2013). 

Similar patterns are observed in access to education where the poor are disproportionately deprived, particularly beyond the primary and secondary levels. In Ghana, for example, positive correlations are found between poverty incidence and education inequalities, with additional deprivation experienced by girls and those living in rural areas (Senadza, 2012). is is also the case in many other countries in the region. A recent study by the Brookings Center for Universal Education’s Africa Learning Barometer finds that individuals who are poor, female and attending school in rural communities in the region are far less likely to be learning critical skills such as reading, writing and mathematics. The study finds that people in extreme education poverty (less than two years of schooling) are much less likely to learn (see figure 11.1) (Agbor, 2012). Disadvantages in opportunities for education, as with healthcare, are linked to poverty and also to lower levels of access for girls and women and people living in rural areas. 

Income inequalities, as well as inequalities between men and women and those in rural and urban areas, are reinforced across generations because deprivation in access to quality education and healthcare limits opportunities for secure livelihoods. Indeed, studies in a number of countries have found that parents’ educational attainment and earnings are two of the strongest predictors of children’s educational attainment (Duncan and Murnane, 2011). In a world where advanced skills are increasingly central to work across sectors and in all regions, these inequalities in education translate into future inequalities in earnings (Autor, 2014). In South Africa, fathers pass on three-fifths of their earnings advantage to sons, much of which is linked to the former’s level of education (Piraino, 2015). In Senegal, parents’ education is also positively associated with the living standards of their adult children and maternal education has a much larger positive effect than paternal education (Lambert, Ravallion and Van de Walle, 2014). 

In highly unequal societies, intergenerational mobility is limited. Parents’ levels of education, income and health can greatly affect the opportunities available to their children unless policy interventions are made to increase opportunities for mobility. is is particularly important for girls and people living in rural areas, where low levels of access to quality education and healthcare are felt most significantly. In this regard, the human development of future generations will depend on policy actions taken today against the multiple dimensions of inequality. 

Drivers of inequality in human development 

Perpetuation of inequalities in income, health and education outcomes is linked to complex mixes of discriminatory social norms and patterns of service provision, combined with exposure to conflict in some cases, among other reasons. High levels of poverty and inequality combined with asymmetries in access to health and education services are problematic. Today, many countries in SSA still feel the effects of cost-cutting measures in education and health services that were implemented in the 1980s and 1990s. is is especially the case in rural areas where cuts were the greatest and for girls, who often forgo education when families cannot afford to send all of their children to school (Ombati and Mokua, 2012). Expenditures on health and education services often disproportionately reach wealthier populations. is is the case in Ghana, United Republic of Tanzania and South Africa, where health services are directed toward rich populations even while the burden of illness is much greater for low-income populations (Mills et al., 2012). ere is some evidence that democratic engagement may help direct government policies and expenditures toward improving health and education outcomes. ere is a strong correlation between the 2015 Economist Democracy Index and HDI (0.60), indicating that when citizens have a greater say in decisions that affect them, overall human development status is strengthened. 

Studies have found that one of the single greatest potential equalisers in the region is increased access to education, including access to technical, vocational and entrepreneurial education that increases skills and employability (Anyanwu, Erhijakpor and Obi, 2016). Universal quality education and health systems are essential. Access to public education is unlikely to reduce inequalities if teachers are poorly trained, class sizes are large and resources are limited. In this instance, the children of wealthy individuals are likely to go to private schools, obtaining higher-quality schooling than those in the public system and maintaining inequalities. For example, in Kenya, after the introduction of the Free Primary Education (FPE) programme in 2003, the proportion of children attending private primary schools increased by 7 percentage points by 2007 as parents reacted to the quality of public education (Nishimura and Yamano, 2013). 

Social norms and traditions can also drive inequality by limiting opportunities for women and minorities. For example, traditions dictating that women and girls carry a disproportionate burden of unpaid work in the home limit their opportunities relative to men and boys (UNDP, 2015a). According to time-use surveys in developing countries, traditional work divisions leave women responsible for more than three-quarters of the time their household dedicates to unpaid care work. 

In Mali, men spend 21 minutes per day doing unpaid work while women spend 241 minutes per day in unpaid work. As such, women in Mali perform over ten times more unpaid work than men, while men only do 42 percent more paid work than women (ibid.). Women’s unequal contributions to unpaid work reduce time available for education and activities that increase their preparation for the job market and also limit the time they can commit to paid work. Women are also limited in access to healthcare because of norms that reduce their decision-making authority in communities and households. In Tanzania, Ghana and Uganda, surveys indicate that women are less likely to use maternal health services when they live in areas that are relatively tolerant of violence against women (Adjiwanou and LeGrand, 2014). Additionally, when traditional norms encourage early marriage and childbearing, girls leave school at a young age and miss out on opportunities to expand their education and gain skills that would empower them to consider different livelihoods. 

Conflict remains a barrier to overcoming inequalities for many communities and countries, although the number of countries in conflict in SSA has declined over the past 15 years. When individuals live in fear of violence (either real or perceived), their abilities to make choices freely and access opportunities are diminished. People may be afraid to leave their homes or communities, which limits work, access to health services and schooling. When parents fear for the physical and sexual safety of daughters, they are likely to keep them out of school (Pinheiro, 2006). Violence can magnify existing inequalities within societies when certain groups are the targets of violence. Women and sexual, ethnic and religious minorities, for example, are more likely to be threatened by violence, real or perceived, which disproportionately constrains their opportunities (Stewart, 2008). In areas affected by conflict, deficiencies in access to services and livelihoods can have lasting effects, stifling human potential relative to those areas that are free of conflict. The result can be geographical inequalities in outcomes across many dimensions of human development. Targeted action for populations affected by conflict may help reduce these disparities and reinforce movements toward peace and social cohesion. 


 


